Barry, when we try to understand what our mental state is, what our mind is, we know
the brain does it. But how does it do it? What are the mechanisms by which the brain
gives us what we think is the mind? Well, I think the mechanisms are beginning to show us how much
colouring, shading, structuring and form is going into a single conscious episode. It's
interesting that what happens at any moment in consciousness depends on many things that happen
outside that moment elsewhere, both what's gone on before and how the brain is anticipating what's
coming next, and also your recognition of familiar objects, familiar faces, a familiar smell.
Now, when all of that information is being assembled, our job and the brain's job it seems
is to provide me, to provide my conscious mental state with something recognisable, familiar and
a clue to what's going on in my environment. So we're using internal clues, external clues,
to provide a single experience that gets me around the world and tells me what's going on out there
and with me. So you're relating memory systems that you have, all of your senses together.
How many different modules, if you will, mental modules come in to give this sense of
of normality that we have, which we know comes from a huge number of different kinds of inputs.
A huge number of different kinds of inputs. And I think some of the inputs we don't recognise
is occurring at all. Take the sense of smell, terribly important, but often goes unnoticed.
So we think we're relying on our vision and we're relying on our hearing a lot. But sense of smell
is giving you something like familiarity. Is this my own home? Because when I walk in it will
smell the way it should. Now, I don't notice it because I'm so used to it. But if I lost my sense
of smell, that would make the place I was now familiar with seem eerie, strange, unfamiliar.
So I think we're getting signals all the time from various different senses. We're getting
signals perhaps from different kinds of visual systems, not just what are the recognisable
objects, but how near are they to me? Can I reach for them? So we treat things that are within our
peripersonal space, the kind of sphere of operation of our reach very differently from
things that are outside it. I might have no such attachment to a cup that's over there
as to one that's right by my arm. So huge numbers of very delicate operations are going on all the
time across many ranges of sensory inputs to give a structured and a rich experience that
makes me poised for action, familiar in my environment, and also comfortable with myself.
So we're talking about the senses part of how the brain makes the mind. But there are other
pieces as well, language, for example, or different kinds of memory systems that are emotional,
as opposed to sensorial. So how about some of these big systems that work together? I mean,
sensory is one category and there are many subcategories, but how many of these big categories
are integrating together? Yes, I mean, there's overlay. I mean, we're never without our senses.
The idea that we're having experience with our senses switched off is nonsense. So there's
always sensory information providing a lot of the texture in the background. But of course,
what's going on in consciousness has to be captured and related to other moments in our life. We're
quite often very interested in how we make sense of the here and now by what we previously saw or
experienced. And some of the things that will track across those separate episodes will be memory,
partly episodic memory, have I been here before, but also semantic memory when I'm classifying
things as of a certain kind, recognizably of the same type. It's that kind of car, it's that kind
of bottle and so on. Now, when I'm dealing with the world around me, there's always a level of
appreciation of how I feel about it. So you've got this constant modulation of your state of
consciousness by your emotions. And then on top of that, of course, we want to classify, capture,
and make precise some of the things that would otherwise quickly fade from consciousness. And
I think language is very good at anchoring our experience. It gives us a way of locking on to
and locking down some parts. Also, of course, gives us a way of coordinating our conscious
experience with one another. Because by using certain words, I can put you in mind of I can
actually rearrange your experience to make you think about things that aren't here. If I start
talking about New York or Chicago, we're not there. But of course, somehow your mind can
flip there very easily. Now that magic of words, which allows us to transport the mind outside
the moment of consciousness, is a large part of what gives us extended minds, minds that can
communicate one with another. So one way in which the brain makes the mind is giving us new insights
into why the mind experiences things the way it does. And of course, when we're at the level of
mind, it all seems to be very easy to understand just from reflecting on our own experience.
But new work on the brain is actually casting light on why our experience patterns the way it
does, why it has the form and character it does. Here's some unexpected surprises. So it turns out
there are certain aromas that are often used in shampoo that make your hair feel softer. So it
turns out that smell is having an impact on touch. It's making what you feel at the end of your
fingers change. Similarly, aromas and certain foods can make them taste creamier. So that's an
unexpected way in which that sounds bizarre. It sounds bizarre. And yet this is something we
wouldn't have known unless we were able to drill down into how the brain is actually making and
manufacturing those those touch experiences. Here's another one. When we're eating potato chips,
and we leave them out for a day or two out of the packet, they go stale. They're not very nice to
eat. Stale, of course, is just that they crumble differently in the mouth. But if you put on headphones
and you amplify the high frequency sound of your own crunching, they taste fresh. So again,
who would have thought that sound would have an impact on flavour? So this way in which
single experiences that we think are coming from a very easily recognisable source are actually
concoctions that depend on a collaboration of senses to produce that effect. And so now we're
beginning to understand our experience better by seeing precisely how the brain makes these
moments in mind.